==============================
Using the generated CSP nonce
==============================
When ``NONCE`` is included in a directive, the nonce value is returned in the CSP headers **if it is
used**, e.g. by evaluating the nonce in your template.  To actually make the browser do anything
with this value, you will need to include it in the attributes of the tags that you wish to mark as
safe.


.. Note::

   Use view source on a page to see nonce values. **Nonce values are
   not visible in browser developer tools.** To prevent malicious CSS
   selectors leaking the values, `they are not exposed to the DOM
   <https://github.com/whatwg/html/pull/2373>`_.


``Middleware``
==============
Installing the middleware creates a lazily evaluated property ``csp_nonce`` and attaches it to all
incoming requests.

.. code-block:: python

    MIDDLEWARE = (
        # ...
        "csp.middleware.CSPMiddleware",
        # ...
    )

This value can be accessed directly on the request object in any view or template and manually
appended to any script element like so -

.. code-block:: html

	<script nonce="{{request.csp_nonce}}">
		var hello="world";
	</script>

Assuming the ``NONCE`` sentinel is included in the ``script-src`` directive, this will result in the
above script being allowed.

.. Note::

   The nonce will only be included in the CSP header if:

     - ``csp.constants.NONCE`` is present in the ``script-src`` or ``style-src`` directives, **and**
     - ``request.csp_nonce`` is accessed during the request lifecycle, after the middleware
       processes the request but before it processes the response.

   The ``csp.middleware.CSPMiddleware`` will include the nonce in the CSP
   header as it processes the response, but only if it was generated by code
   reading ``request.csp_nonce``.

   If code reads an un-generated ``request.csp_nonce`` after the middleware
   processes the response, it is probably a programming error. In this case,
   attempting to read the nonce (like ``str(request.csp_nonce)``) will raise a
   ``csp.exceptions.CSPNonceError``. If the nonce was generated and included in
   the CSP header, then reading ``request.csp_nonce`` is safe.

   It is always safe to test ``request.csp_nonce``, such as
   ``bool(request.csp_nonce)`` or in a conditional like ``if request.csp_nonce:
   ...``. This will return ``True`` if the nonce was ccessed and generated, and
   ``False`` if not acccesed or generated yet.


If other middleware or a later process needs to access ``request.csp_nonce``, then there are a few options:

* The middleware can be placed after ``csp.middleware.CSPMiddleware`` in the ``MIDDLEWARE`` setting.
  This ensures that the middleware generates the nonce before ``CSPMiddleware`` writes the CSP header.
* Use the alternate ``csp.middleware.CSPMiddlewareAlwaysGenerateNonce`` middleware, which always
  generates a nonce and includes it in the CSP header.
* Add a later middleware that accesses the nonce. For example, this function:

.. code-block:: python

    def init_csp_nonce_middleware(get_response):
        def middleware(request):
            getattr(request, "csp_nonce", None)
            return get_response(request)

        return middleware

could be added to the ``MIDDLEWARE`` list:

.. code-block:: python

    MIDDLEWARE = (
        "my.middleware.ThatUsesCSPNonce",
        # ...
        "csp.middleware.CSPMiddleware",
        # ...
        "my.middleware.init_csp_nonce_middleware",
    )

``Context Processor``
=====================
This library contains an optional context processor, adding ``csp.context_processors.nonce`` to your
configured context processors exposes a variable called ``CSP_NONCE`` into the global template
context. This is simple shorthand for ``request.csp_nonce``, but can be useful if you have many
occurrences of script tags.

.. code-block:: jinja

    <script nonce="{{CSP_NONCE}}">
    	var hello="world";
    </script>


``Django Template Tag/Jinja Extension``
=======================================

.. note::

   If you're making use of ``csp.extensions.NoncedScript`` you need to have ``jinja2>=2.9.6``
   installed, so please make sure to either use ``django-csp[jinja2]`` in your requirements or
   define it yourself.


It can be easy to forget to include the ``nonce`` property in a script tag, so there is also a
``script`` template tag available for both Django templates and Jinja environments.

This tag will output a properly nonced script every time. For the sake of syntax highlighting, you
can wrap the content inside of the ``script`` tag in ``<script>`` html tags, which will be
subsequently removed in the rendered output. Any valid script tag attributes can be specified and
will be forwarded into the rendered html.


Django Templates
----------------

Add the CSP template tags to the TEMPLATES section of your settings file:

.. code-block:: python

    TEMPLATES = [
        {
            "OPTIONS": {
                "libraries": {
                    "csp": "csp.templatetags.csp",
                }
            }
        }
    ]

Then load the ``csp`` template tags and use ``script`` in the template:

.. code-block:: jinja

	{% load csp %}
	{% script type="application/javascript" async=False %}
		<script>
			var hello='world';
		</script>
	{% endscript %}


Jinja
-----

Add ``csp.extensions.NoncedScript`` to the TEMPLATES section of your settings file:

.. code-block:: python

    TEMPLATES = [
        {
            "BACKEND": "django.template.backends.jinja2.Jinja2",
            "OPTIONS": {
                "extensions": [
                    "csp.extensions.NoncedScript",
                ],
            },
        }
    ]


.. code-block:: jinja

	{% script type="application/javascript" async=False %}
		<script>
			var hello='world';
		</script>
	{% endscript %}


Both templates output the following with a different nonce:

.. code-block:: html

	<script nonce='123456' type="application/javascript" async=false>var hello='world';</script>
